What is SD-WAN?
SD-WAN decouples the WAN control plane from the data plane and centralizes control in cloud-based controllers. Instead of configuring each router individually and relying on distributed routing protocols to build the WAN, SD-WAN uses a centralized controller to push policies to all edge devices simultaneously.

Cisco SD-WAN (Viptela) Controller Roles:

Controller   Role  
   
  vManage   Management plane — GUI and API, configuration management, monitoring, telemetry  
  vSmart   Control plane — distributes routing policies, OMP routes, security policies to all vEdge devices  
  vBond   Orchestration plane — initial authentication and NAT traversal for vEdge devices joining the overlay

OMP — Overlay Management Protocol:
The SD-WAN control plane uses OMP (Overlay Management Protocol) instead of traditional routing protocols. OMP runs between vEdge devices and the vSmart controller. vSmart distributes OMP routes (TLOCs — Transport Location Identifiers) and policies to all vEdge devices, which then build IPsec tunnels directly to each other.

A TLOC identifies a specific transport (color) on a specific device: IP address + color (e.g., internet, mpls, biz-internet, lte). This is how SD-WAN knows which physical transport to use for a given flow.

SD-WAN Key Features:

1. Transport Independence:
SD-WAN can use any combination of transports — MPLS, broadband internet, LTE/5G, MPLS — simultaneously. Traffic is distributed across transports based on application SLA policies.

2. Application-Aware Routing:
SD-WAN continuously measures latency, jitter, and packet loss on every transport path. Policies can specify: "If latency on the MPLS path exceeds 20ms, route this application's traffic over the internet path instead."

3. Centralized Policy:
A single policy pushed from vManage can control routing, QoS, segmentation, and security across hundreds of sites simultaneously — no CLI on each device.

4. Zero Trust Security:
All SD-WAN data plane tunnels are IPsec-encrypted by default. Certificates are distributed by the vBond orchestrator.

SD-WAN vs. MPLS — When to Use Each:

Factor   MPLS   SD-WAN  
    
  Guaranteed QoS   ✅ Native CoS   ✅ Application-aware, but internet QoS varies  
  Transport cost   💰 High (carrier-managed)   💰 Lower (can use internet)  
  Deployment complexity   Medium (carrier-provisioned)   Medium (controller-managed)  
  Multi-transport flexibility   ❌ Single transport   ✅ Any transport  
  Application visibility   ❌ Limited   ✅ Deep application awareness  
  Convergence after failure   Minutes (carrier SLA)   Seconds (BFD-driven)  
  Best for   Latency-sensitive apps (voice, trading) at scale   Modern hybrid cloud + multi-site with cost optimization

> Graduate Design Reality: Most enterprise networks today are using MPLS + SD-WAN in parallel during a migration phase. SD-WAN can overlay MPLS as just another transport color, allowing a phased transition without a hard cutover.

IPsec Overview:
IPsec is a suite of protocols that provides authentication, integrity, and encryption for IP packets. IPsec operates at Layer 3 and is used for both site-to-site VPNs (connecting offices) and remote access VPNs (connecting individual users).

IPsec Key Protocols:
- IKE (Internet Key Exchange): Negotiates security associations and exchanges encryption keys. IKEv2 is the current standard.
- ESP (Encapsulating Security Payload): Provides encryption + authentication of the payload. The most common IPsec protocol.
- AH (Authentication Header): Provides authentication only (no encryption). Rarely used in modern deployments.

IPsec Modes:
- Transport Mode: Encrypts only the payload; original IP header remains intact. Used for host-to-host communication.
- Tunnel Mode: Encrypts the entire original IP packet and adds a new outer IP header. Used for site-to-site VPNs — the original packet is completely hidden.

IKEv2 Phase 1 and Phase 2:
1. IKE Phase 1 (IKESAINIT + IKEAUTH): Establishes a secure, authenticated channel between the two VPN endpoints. Negotiates encryption algorithms, authentication method (pre-shared key or certificates), and exchanges Diffie-Hellman public keys.
2. IKE Phase 2 (CREATECHILDSA): Negotiates the IPsec Security Association — the actual encryption parameters for data traffic.

Site-to-Site IPsec VPN Configuration (IOS):

! Phase 1 — IKEv2 Proposal
crypto ikev2 proposal SITE-TO-SITE-PROP
 encryption aes-cbc-256
 integrity sha256
 group 14

crypto ikev2 policy SITE-TO-SITE-POL
 proposal SITE-TO-SITE-PROP

! Phase 1 — IKEv2 Keyring (pre-shared key)
crypto ikev2 keyring SITE-B-KEY
 peer SITE-B
  address 203.0.113.2
  pre-shared-key cisco12345

! Phase 2 — IPsec Transform Set
crypto ipsec transform-set TS esp-aes 256 esp-sha256-hmac
 mode tunnel

! Crypto Map — bind Phase 1 and Phase 2
crypto map SITE-TO-SITE-MAP 10 ipsec-isakmp
 set peer 203.0.113.2
 set transform-set TS
 match address VPN-TRAFFIC

! Apply to WAN interface
interface GigabitEthernet0/0
 crypto map SITE-TO-SITE-MAP

GRE over IPsec vs. Pure IPsec:
Pure IPsec only encrypts unicast traffic — it cannot carry routing protocol multicast (OSPF, EIGRP hellos). To run a routing protocol over a VPN, wrap GRE (Generic Routing Encapsulation) inside IPsec. GRE creates a virtual tunnel interface that can carry any protocol, and IPsec encrypts the GRE traffic.

The Module 03 lab builds a WAN simulation in Packet Tracer:
- 3 sites: HQ, Branch-A, Branch-B, connected through a simulated ISP cloud.
- Configure GRE tunnels between HQ-Branch-A and HQ-Branch-B.
- Configure IPsec to encrypt the GRE tunnels (GRE over IPsec).
- Run OSPF over the GRE tunnels so all sites learn each other's routes.
- Verify end-to-end encrypted connectivity between all three sites.

Assignments due: Sunday, November 8, 2026 at 11:59 PM CST

End of Part 2 — Module 03